% Nineteenth-Century American Religion: A Digital History Seminar
% Lincoln A. Mullen

In 1784 Medfield author Hannah Adams published the book that would make
her famous, *An Alphabetical Compendium of the Various Sects Which Have
Appeared from the Beginning of the Christian Era to the Present Day*.
Adams, who was the first American woman to earn her livelihood with her
pen, had compiled a painstaking guide to world religions that had given
her trouble that was more than intellectual. On the one hand, she wished
to counter the practice of other authors who gave "the most unfavorable
descriptions of the denominations that they disliked." But on the other
hand, as she "abridge[d] what appeared to me the most plausible
arguments for every denomination," she "suffered extremely from mental
indecision, while perusing the various and contradictory arguments
adduced ... in defence of their respective religious systems."
[@adams1832memoir, pp. 13--14.]

The problem Adams faced was how religious diversity should feature in
the public sphere, but also how encounters with other religions changed
one's private, internal experience of religion. Exploring how Americans
dealt with those connected problems is the topic of this proposed class
and of my dissertation. My dissertation, "The Varieties of Religious
Conversion: The Origins of Religious Choice in the United States" is a
history of conversion---the quintessential expression of this
problem---from the end of the American revolution to the publication of
William James's *Varieties of Religious Experience* in 1902. These are
also the chronological boundaries of this course, though the course
studies the experiences of the United States's many religions more
broadly. When Adams began writing her book during the American
Revolution, the new nation was already a religious safe haven, but
thanks to disestablishment, immigration, and religious innovation, the
United States in the nineteenth century became extraordinarily diverse.
To give just two examples, Adams wrote that American Catholics "are not
numerous," but by the end of the century they would comprise the
country's single largest religious institution; the last edition of
Adams's *Dictionary* (1817) contained no entry for Mormonism, because
Joseph Smith would not publish the founding text of his new religion for
another thirteen years. [@adams1817dictionary, p. 358.] This course will
explore the development of religious diversity in the nineteenth
century, which in many ways has laid the foundation for the U.S.
experience of religion up to the twenty-first century.

As the capstone to this class, students will make a digital history
project. The course is designed to introduce students to the
interdisciplinary field of digital humanities. If the digital humanities
is about "building," as two leading practitioners define it, then this
class's hands-on, immersive building of a project will be a valuable way
of introducing students to the field. [@ramsay2012developing] Students
will have to learn traditional skills of historical research and
argumentative writing for the project, but they will also learn skills
of collaboration, writing for public audiences, digital analysis of
evidence, mapping, project management, and advanced digital literacy
that will serve them well in positions in government, business, and
research outside the academy. I have modeled this aspect of the course
after several other digital humanities classes at other institutions.

This class will complement other course offerings, since it fills a
middle level of analysis between Maura Jane Farrelly's survey of four
centuries of religious history offered by American Studies, and Jonathan
Sarna's courses on American Judaism in the Near Eastern and Judaic
Studies Departments. This class would be only the second digital
humanities course offered at Brandeis, following on John Unsworth's 2013
English department class, though a growing number of institutions---both
research universities and liberal arts colleges---are now offering
similar courses. I have consulted with Josh Wilson of Library and
Technology Services, and LTS intends to support this class with the
necessary technological infrastructure. Judy Pinnolis and Patrick
Gamsby, the humanities librarians, also offered to help students
with the research for the course.

Enrollment figures indicate that Brandeis students want to take courses 
on religion. Classes offered in religious history or cognate disciplines 
usually enroll twenty or more students.

\footnotesize
\def\medskip{\vskip -.30em}

  Course                                      Instructor         2013   2012   2011
  ------------------------------------------- ----------------- ------ ------ ------
  Religion in American Life                   Farrelly            25     22   
  American Judaism                            Sarna                      22   
  Judaism Confronts America                   Sarna                             21
  Sociology of Religion                       Cadge               62          
  Religions in Greater Boston                 Cadge & Brooten                   36
  Anthropology of Religion                    Golomski            34          
  Intro to Judaism, Christianity, and Islam   Decter              16          
  Intro to Hinduism                           Nair                       40   


